docs(k8s) add ingress version documentation (#2477)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/kubernetes-ingress-controller/1.0.x/concepts/ingress-versions.md

---

> title: Ingress v1 and v1beta1 differences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Ingress v1 and v1beta1 Differences
```

---

## Introduction

Kubernetes 1.18 introduced a new `networking.k8s.io/v1` API for the [Ingress resource][kubernetes-ingress-doc].
It standardizes common practices and clarifies implementation requirements that
were previously up to individual controller vendors. This document covers those

> changes as they relate to Kong Ingress Controller and provides example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes as they relate to {{site.kic_product_name}} and provides sample
```
Might as well start using this variable now, in case the name changes again.

equivalent `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1` and `networking.k8s.io/v1` resources for comparison.

## Paths

Both Ingress v1beta1 and v1 HTTP rules require a path, which represents a [URI
path][uri-rfc-paths]. Although v1beta1 had specified that paths were [POSIX

> regular expressions][posix-regex] and enforced this, but in practice most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regular expressions][posix-regex] and enforced this, in practice most
```

controllers used other other implementations that did not match the

> specification. v1 seeks to reduce confusion by introducing several i[path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specification. v1 seeks to reduce confusion by introducing several [path
```

types][path-types] and lifting restrictions on regular expression grammars used
by controllers.

> ### `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
```
For the sidebar, mostly.

The controller passes paths directly to Kong and relies on its [path handling

> logic][kong-path]. The Kong proxy treats paths as a prefix unless they include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
logic][kong-paths]. The Kong proxy treats paths as a prefix unless they include
```

characters [not allowed in RFC 3986 paths][uri-rfc-paths], in which case the
proxy assumes they are a regular expression, and does not treat slashes as
special characters. For example, the prefix `/foo` can match any of the
following:

```
/foo
/foo/
/foobar
/foo/bar
```

> ### `networking.k8s.io/v1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### networking.k8s.io/v1
```

Although v1 Ingresses provide path types with more clearly-defined logic, the
controller must still create Kong routes and work within the Kong proxy's
routing logic. As such, the controller translates Ingress rule paths to create

> Kong routes that match the specification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kong routes that match one of the following specifications: `Exact`, `Prefix`, or `ImplementationSpecific`.
```
Mostly because it's not great to leave a `:` right before a header.

#### Exact

If `pathType` is `Exact`, the controller creates a Kong route with a regular

> expression that matches the rule path only, e.g. an exact rule for `/foo` in an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expression that matches the rule path only. For example, an exact rule for `/foo` in an
```

Ingress translates to a Kong route with a `/foo$` regular expression path.

#### Prefix

If `pathType` is `Prefix`, the controller creates a Kong route with two path

> criteria, e.g. `/foo` will create a route with a `/foo$` regular expression and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
criteria. For example, `/foo` will create a route with a `/foo$` regular expression and
```

`/foo/` plain path.

#### ImplementationSpecific

> The controller leaves ImplementationSpecific path rules entirely up to the Kong

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The controller leaves `ImplementationSpecific` path rules entirely up to the Kong
```

router. It creates a route with the exact same path string as the Ingress rule.

## Ingress class

[Ingress class][ingress-class] indicates which resources an ingress controller
should process. It provides a means to separate out configuration intended for

> other controllers or other instances of the Kong Ingress Controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other controllers or other instances of the {{site.kic_product_name}}.
```

In v1beta1, ingress class was handled informally using
`kubernetes.io/ingress.class` [annotations][deprecated-annotation]. v1
introduces a new [IngressClass resource][ingress-class-api] which provides
richer information about the controller. v1 Ingresses are bound to a class via
their `ingressClassName` field.

For example, consider this v1beta1 Ingress:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: example-ingress
  annotations:
    kubernetes.io/ingress.class: "kong"
spec:
  rules:
  - host: example.com
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /test
        backend:
          serviceName: echo
          servicePort: 80
```

Its ingress class annotation is set to `kong`, and ingress controllers set to
process `kong` class Ingresses will process it.

In v1, the equivalent configuration declares a `kong` IngressClass resource
whose `metadata.name` field indicates the class name. The `ingressClassName`
value of the Ingress object must match the value of the `name` field in the
IngressClass metadata:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: IngressClass
metadata:
  name: kong
spec:
---
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: example-ingress
spec:
  ingressClassName: kong
  rules:
  - http:
      paths:
      - path: /testpath
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
          service:
            name: test
            port:
              number: 80
```

## Hostnames

Ingress v1 formally codifies support for [wildcard hostnames][wildcard-hostnames].
v1beta1 Ingresses did not reject wildcard hostnames, however, and Kong had
[existing support for them][kong-wildcard-hostnames].

As such, while the v1beta1 specification did not officially support wildcard
hostnames, you can use wildcard hostnames with either version. Setting a
hostname like `*.example.com` will match requests for both `foo.example.com`
and `bar.example.com` with either v1 or v1beta1 Ingresses.

## Backend types

> Ingress v1 introduces support for backends other than Kubernetes Services, via

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ingress v1 introduces support for backends other than Kubernetes Services through
```

[resource backends][resource-backends].

> Kong has support for routes without a service in some cases, such as routes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kong has support for Routes without a Service in some cases, such as Routes
```

> that use the [AWS Lambda plugin][lambda-plugin]. However, it does not yet offer

Reviewer: I don't know if it's a good idea to phrase something as "does not yet do this thing", since that sounds like you're promising a feature change in the future. Whether this feature is going to be available or not is not super relevant - timelines and roadmaps change, so I'd be wary of any pseudo-promises.

Author: Yeah--we're in a weird position where we kinda supported something akin to resource backends through our existing features, and the question of how to write K8S configuration for those even though there's no real appropriate Service definition does come up in practice (recently https://kongstrong.slack.com/archives/CA42V003B/p1606771633206900).

We need to cover the workaround that enables those use cases (dummy Services) somewhere while acknowledging their relation to the new concept introduced in Ingress v1 that we don't support. Not sure where that will go in the future (since K8S' own Service APIs roadmap means many current Ingress concepts will change significantly); have reworded to say that we don't support any service backend stuff, but that you should use the dummy Services where appropriate.

Kubernetes resources for them. As such, you should instead create a placeholder
Kubernetes Service for them, using an [ExternalName Service][external-name]

> with an RFC 2606 invalid hostname, e.g. `kong.invalid`. You can use these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with an RFC 2606 invalid hostname (for example,`kong.invalid`). You can use these
```

placeholder services with either v1 or v1beta1 Ingresses.

[kubernetes-ingress-doc]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/

> [ingress-class]: ./ingress-classes.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ingress-class]: /kubernertes-ingress-controller/{{page.kong_version}}/concepts/ingress-classes
```

---
title: Ingress v1 and v1beta1 differences
---

## Introduction

> Kubernetes 1.18 introduced a new v1 API for the [Ingress resource][kubernetes-ingress-doc].

Reviewer 2: AFAIK `networking.k8s.io/v1` is available by default as of 1.19, not 1.18

Reviewer 2: Also, `v1beta1` is ambiguous: it can be either `extensions/v1beta1` or ``extensions.k8s.io/v1beta1`. It's not unusual for apiversions to be moved between groups like that.

Author: 1.18 introduced it although it was a beta feature--it wasn't novel in 1.19, just graduated to GA.

The v1beta1 ambiguity is intentional here, since it exists in either extensions or networking depending on which K8S version you use, though its functionality is identical. That history isn't the focus here, and IMO the shorthand is fine for the differences this document seeks to cover.

Reviewer 2: With `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1` explicitly called out in the document, I'm on board :+1:

Reviewer 2: On 1.18 vs 1.19: with the current phrasing, I am expecting users coming to us with a complaint that "your docs said that I can use ingressv1 with 1.18, I tried it and I failed"

> I can't test that in our GKE cluster, as GKE 1.18 still rejects v1 Ingresses and 1.19 isn't yet available

this experience seems to indicate that confusion here (about the feature being opt-in) is a real thing.

Author: Fair enough. Changed to 1.19 on the assumption that beta users are savvy enough to understand the distinction and know that they've enabled the gate, and that less savvy users will just use 1.19.

> Kubernetes 1.18 introduced a new v1 API for the [Ingress resource][kubernetes-ingress-doc].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes 1.18 introduced a new `networking.k8s.io/v1` API for the [Ingress resource][kubernetes-ingress-doc].
```

this is because Kubernetes API versions are always qualified like this; `v1` suggests it being part of core.

It standardizes common practices and clarifies implementation requirements that
were previously up to individual controller vendors. This document covers those
changes as they relate to Kong Ingress Controller and provides example

> equivalent v1beta1 and v1 resources for comparison.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
equivalent `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1` and `networking.k8s.io/v1` resources for comparison.
```

See below - let's be specific about exact API versions where it matters

## Paths

Both Ingress v1beta1 and v1 HTTP rules require a path, which represents a [URI
path][uri-rfc-paths]. Although v1beta1 had specified that paths were [POSIX
regular expressions][posix-regex] and enforced this, but in practice most
controllers used other other implementations that did not match the
specification. v1 seeks to reduce confusion by introducing several i[path
types][path-types] and lifting restrictions on regular expression grammars used
by controllers.

> ### v1beta1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1`
```

> The controller passes paths directly to Kong and relies on its [path handling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the `spec.rules[*].http.paths[*].path` field, the controller passes paths directly to Kong and relies on its [path handling
```

Author: There aren't any other paths in the Ingress spec that these could be confused with, so IMO this isn't adding much beyond making the sentence longer. Leaving this as-is.

logic][kong-path]. The Kong proxy treats paths as a prefix unless they include
characters [not allowed in RFC 3986 paths][uri-rfc-paths], in which case the
proxy assumes they are a regular expression, and does not treat slashes as
special characters. For example, the prefix `/foo` can match any of the
following:

```
/foo
/foo/
/foobar
/foo/bar
```

> ### v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `networking.k8s.io/v1`
```

> Although v1 Ingresses provide path types with more clearly-defined logic, the
> controller must still create Kong routes and work within the Kong proxy's
> routing logic. As such, the controller translates Ingress rule paths to create
> Kong routes that match the specification:

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could frame this as a feature, instead of emphasizing KIC's heavy-lifting :stuck_out_tongue:

```suggestion
Ingress resources at this API version have explicitly defined matching semantics (as set in the `pathType` field). Under the hood of Kong Ingress Controller, a path (parameterized by `pathType`) gets translated to a regular expression in a Kong Route.
```

Author: It's an implementation detail, and I don't see a good reason we'd try to obfuscate what actually occurs. Users can check the admin API to see what happens, and the use of multiple path matches [can have practical implications](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/issues/958) that they need to be aware of. Leaving this as-is.

#### Exact

> To handle exact matches, the controller creates a Kong route with a regular

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `pathType` is `Exact`, the controller creates a Kong route with a regular
```

expression that matches the rule path only, e.g. an exact rule for `/foo` in an
Ingress translates to a Kong route with a `/foo$` regular expression path.

#### Prefix

> To handle prefix matches, the controller creates a Kong route with two path

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `pathType` is `Prefix`, the controller creates a Kong route with two path
```

criteria, e.g. `/foo` will create a route with a `/foo$` regular expression and
`/foo/` plain path.

#### ImplementationSpecific

The controller leaves ImplementationSpecific path rules entirely up to the Kong
router. It creates a route with the exact same path string as the Ingress rule.

## Ingress class

[Ingress class][ingress-class] indicates which resources an ingress controller
should process. It provides a means to separate out configuration intended for
other controllers or other instances of the Kong Ingress Controller.

In v1beta1, ingress class was handled informally using
`kubernetes.io/ingress.class` [annotations][deprecated-annotation]. v1
introduces a new [IngressClass resource][ingress-class-api] which provides
richer information about the controller. v1 Ingresses are bound to a class via
their `ingressClassName` field.

For example, consider this v1beta1 Ingress:

```

> apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
```

Let's explain the migration one step at a time - from `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1` to `networking.k8s.io/v1`. To avoid confusion, we should probably avoid mixing the two in one doc as well.

Particularly so because migration from `extensions/v1beta1` to `networking.k8s.io/v1beta1` is a no-op.

kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: example-ingress
  annotations:
    kubernetes.io/ingress.class: "kong"
spec:
  rules:
  - host: example.com
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /test
        backend:
          serviceName: echo
          servicePort: 80
```

Its ingress class annotation is set to `kong`, and ingress controllers set to
process `kong` class Ingresses will process it.

In v1, the equivalent configuration declares a `kong` IngressClass resource
whose `metadata.name` field indicates the class name. The `ingressClassName`
value of the Ingress object must match the value of the `name` field in the
IngressClass metadata:

```
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: IngressClass
metadata:
  name: kong
spec:

>   controller: konghq.com/kong

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Unless k8s enforces the controller field being non-empty, let's leave it out, because KIC today disregards the IngressClass resource whatsoever. By specifying `controller` we might trick users into thinking that the field has a meaning today (which it doesn't have)

Ingress v1 formally codifies support for [wildcard hostnames][wildcard-hostnames].
v1beta1 Ingresses did not reject wildcard hostnames, however, and Kong had
[existing support for them][kong-wildcard-hostnames].

As such, while the v1beta1 specification did not officially support wildcard
hostnames, you can use wildcard hostnames with either version. Setting a
hostname like `*.example.com` will match requests for both `foo.example.com`
and `bar.example.com` with either v1 or v1beta1 Ingresses.

## Backend types

Ingress v1 introduces support for backends other than Kubernetes Services through
[resource backends][resource-backends].

Kong does not support any dedicated resource backend configurations, though it
does have support for Routes without Services in some cases (for example, when
using the [AWS Lambda plugin][lambda-plugin]). For these routes, you should
create a placeholder Kubernetes Service for them, using an [ExternalName
Service][external-name] with an RFC 2606 invalid hostname, e.g.
`kong.invalid`. You can use these placeholder services with either v1 or
v1beta1 Ingresses.

[kubernetes-ingress-doc]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/

> [ingress-class]: /kubernertes-ingress-controller/{{page.kong_version}}/concepts/ingress-classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ingress-class]: /kubernetes-ingress-controller/{{page.kong_version}}/concepts/ingress-classes
```
Typo, my bad.
